Domain Membership Triples Processing (#454)
ietf-rats-wg/draft-ietf-rats-corim: draft-ietf-rats-corim.md

: An identifier for an Environment that is shared among similar Environment instances, such as those with the same hardware assembly.
See also {{Section 4.2.4 of -eat}}.

Composite Attester:
: A Composite Attester is either a Composite Device ({{Section 3.3 of -rats-arch}}) or a Layered Attester ({{Section 3.2 of -rats-arch}}) or any composition involving a combination of one or more Composite Devices or Layered Attesters.

Domain:

> : A domain is a topological description of a Composite Attester in terms of its constituent Environments and their compositional relationships.

Reviewer: Is this really a topological description? I would expect a topology to include more details than "these environment-maps go together"

Author: Well you club a set of Environments, and link it a parent.

> : A domain is a topological description of a Composite Attester in terms of its constituent Environments and their compositional relationships.

Author: ```suggestion
: A domain is a hierarchical description of a Composite Attester in terms of its constituent Environments and their compositional relationships.
```

#### Triples for domain definitions {#sec-comid-domains}

> A domain is a topological description of a Composite Attester in terms of its constituent Environments and their compositional relationships.

Reviewer: I have seen different descriptions of "composite attester".

Does a domain have to be a complete composite attester, or can it be just part of it.

Can we use a more general description, perhaps something like:

> A domain is a group of environments which are logically connected and should be processed together.

> The following CDDL describes domain type.

Author: We retained the  domain type to retain the domain identifier concept, distinct from the environment concept,  which highlight RATS Target Environments. This helps us explain the Algorithm with greater ease!

~~~ cddl
{::include cddl/domain-type.cddl}
~~~

Domain structure is defined with the following types of triples.

##### Domain Membership Triple {#sec-comid-triple-domain-membership}

> A Domain Membership Triple (DMT) links a domain identifier to its member Environments.

Reviewer 2: Ah, you are right!

#### Triples for domain definitions {#sec-comid-domains}

> A domain is a topological description of a Composite Attester in terms of its constituent Environments and their compositional relationships.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A domain is a hierarchical description of a Composite Attester in terms of its constituent Environments and their compositional relationships.
```

The following CDDL describes domain type.

~~~ cddl
{::include cddl/domain-type.cddl}
~~~

Domain structure is defined with the following types of triples.

##### Domain Membership Triple {#sec-comid-triple-domain-membership}

A Domain Membership Triple (DMT) links a domain identifier to its member Environments.
The triple's subject is the domain identifier while the triple’s object lists all the member Environments within the domain.

The Domain Membership Triple allows an Endorser (for example, an Integrator) to issue an authoritative statement about the composition of an Attester as a collection of Environments.
This allows a topological description of an Attester to be expressed by linking a parent Environment (e.g. a lead Attester) to its child Environments (e.g. one or more sub-Attesters).

> If the Verifier Appraisal policy requires Domain Membership, the Domain Membership Triple is used to match an Attester's reference composition with the actual composition represented in Evidence.

Reviewer: How does this happen?
How is the actual composition represented in Evidence?
Is there an algorithm which the verifier should use to do this matching?

Reviewer 2: I agree with Andy.  Irrespective of the appraisal policy the processing in {{sec-process-dm}} will happen as it’s not optional.  I think L1471 can be removed altogether.

Author: @thomas-fossati : I meant the DMT is an OTI Triple so if a Verifier needs OTI, then what is the purpose of this Triple!

* Authority : Identifies the entity that issued the tuple. A certain type of key material by which the authority (and corresponding provenance) of the tuple can be determined, such as the public key of an asymmetric key pair that is associated with an authority's PKIX certificate.

> * Members : Identifies the set of Environments thats acts as members, when a Domain Membership is expressed in an ECT

Author: i thought I have taken your edit, i cannot see the commit button...

> * Members : Identifies the set of Environments thats acts as members, when a Domain Membership is expressed in an ECT

Author: yes, if you see the text I have taken your suggestion and github automatically resolved it !

> * Members : Identifies the set of Environments thats acts as members, when a Domain Membership is expressed in an ECT

Reviewer 2: Sure, but there was also this:

> I believe that the “Environment” attribute description should also be amended to reflect the expansion in semantics.

which was a bit more substantial.

* Authority : Identifies the entity that issued the tuple. A certain type of key material by which the authority (and corresponding provenance) of the tuple can be determined, such as the public key of an asymmetric key pair that is associated with an authority's PKIX certificate.

> * Members : Identifies the set of Environments that act as members when a Domain Membership is expressed in an ECT

Author: Can you please suggest some suitable text ? I will suggest something but I am not clear what exactly you are looking for?

> * Members : Identifies the set of Environments that act as members when a Domain Membership is expressed in an ECT

Reviewer 2: I have committed it directly because it was not possible to suggest on a line which was not part of the PR.

> * Members : Identifies the set of Environments that act as members when a Domain Membership is expressed in an ECT

Reviewer 2: see 4d6f9f14c6cfefa4ac1be2e0ed7d86d9bd877c15

|           | `members`       | n/a         |
| addition  | `environment`   | Mandatory   |
|           | `element-list`  | Mandatory   |
|           | `authority`     | Mandatory   |
|           | `cmtype`        | Mandatory   |
|           | `profile`       | Optional    |
|           | `members`       | n/a         |
{: #tbl-ev-ect-optionality title="Endorsed Values and Endorsed Values Series tuples requirements"}

### Internal Representation of Domain Membership {#sec-ir-dm}

An internal representation of Domain Membership is expressed in a single ECT, where the domain identifier is set in the `environment`
field of ECT and the Domain members are expressed in `members` field of the ECT.
The `cmtype` is set to domain-member to express the membership.

~~~ cddl
{::include cddl/intrep-domain-mem.cddl}
~~~

{{tbl-dm-ect-optionality}} contains the requirements for the ECT fields of the Domain Membership tuple:

| ECT type  | ECT Field       | Requirement |
|---
| domain    | `environment`   | Mandatory   |
|           | `element-list`  | Optional    |
|           | `authority`     | Mandatory   |
|           | `cmtype`        | Mandatory   |

> |           | `profile`       | n/a         |

Author: ```suggestion
|           | `profile`       | Optional    |
```

|           | `authority`     | Optional    |
|           | `cmtype`        | n/a         |
|           | `profile`       | n/a         |
|           | `members`       | n/a         |
| selection | `environment`   | Mandatory   |
|           | `element-list`  | Mandatory   |
|           | `authority`     | Optional    |
|           | `cmtype`        | n/a         |
|           | `profile`       | n/a         |
|           | `members`       | n/a         |
| addition  | `environment`   | Mandatory   |
|           | `element-list`  | Mandatory   |
|           | `authority`     | Mandatory   |
|           | `cmtype`        | Mandatory   |
|           | `profile`       | Optional    |
|           | `members`       | n/a         |
{: #tbl-ev-ect-optionality title="Endorsed Values and Endorsed Values Series tuples requirements"}

### Internal Representation of Domain Membership {#sec-ir-dm}

An internal representation of Domain Membership is expressed in a single ECT, where the domain identifier is set in the `environment` field of the ECT, and the domain members are expressed in the `members` field.
The `cmtype` is set to domain-member.

~~~ cddl

> {::include cddl/intrep-domain-mem.cddl}

Reviewer 4: where is dm used? I see a "domain ECT type" later that doesn't match this.

* If the Endorsement conceptual message has a profile, the profile is copied to the `ev`.`addition`.`profile` field.

#### Domain Membership Triples Transformation {#sec-ir-dm-trans}

This section describes how the external representation of a Domain Membership Triple (DMT) ({{sec-comid-triple-domain-membership}}) is transformed into its CoRIM internal representation `dm` (see {{sec-ir-dm}}).

{:dmt-enum: counter="dmt1" style="format Step %d."}

{: dmt-enum}
* Allocate a `domain` ECT entry.

* Set the conceptual message type for the `domain` ECT to 6 (`domain-member`).

{:dmt4-enum: counter="dmt4" style="format %i"}

{: dmt4-enum}
* **copy**(`domain-member`, `domain`.`cmtype`)

{: dmt-enum}
* Set the authority for the domain ECT to the DMT signer ({{sec-corim-signer}}).

{:dmt5-enum: counter="dmt5" style="format %i"}

{: dmt5-enum}
* **copy**(DMT.`signer`, `domain`.`authority`)

{: dmt-enum}
* Use the DMT to populate the `dm` internal representation.

{:dmt2-enum: counter="dmt2" style="format %i"}

{: dmt2-enum}
* **copy**(DMT.`domain-id`, `domain`.`environment`)

{: dmt2-enum}
* For each `environment` `e` in DMT.`members`:

> > > **copy**(DMT.`members`[e].`environment-map`, `domain`.`members`[e].`environment-map`)

Reviewer 4: There is no environment-map attribute. 
```suggestion
> > **copy**(DMT.`members`[e], `domain`.`members`[e])
```

Otherwise, do not add the `addition` ECT to the ACS.

#### Processing Domain Membership {#sec-process-dm}

> Domain Membership Triples allow an Endorser (for example, an Integrator) to issue an authoritative statement about the composition of an Attester as a collection of Environments.

Author: Discussed with Andym the text is correct,,,

> If the Verifier Appraisal policy requires Domain Membership, the Domain Membership Triple is used to match an Attester's reference composition with the actual composition represented by Evidence.

Author: As discussed with Andy face to face, it was explained that it is an Attester as per RATS RFC 9334, that has multiple Environments, so the proposed changes on Line 2502 is correct, hence rejecting this suggested change!

> If the Verifier Appraisal policy requires Domain Membership, the Domain Membership Triple is used to match an Attester's reference composition with the actual composition represented by Evidence.

Reviewer 2: I am probably missing something, but the policy has “n/a” for members, so I am not sure I understand how policy and DMT are put together.

Author: i mean if a Verifier requires DMT, as DMT is an OTI Triple. Perhaps I can qualify this...

This section assumes that each Domain Membership Triples has been transformed into an internal representation following the steps described in {{sec-ir-dm-trans}}, resulting in the representation specified in {{sec-ir-dm}}.

Domain Membership ECTs (`cmtype`: `domain-member`) are matched with ACS entries (of `cmtype`: `evidence`) using the following algorithm:

> * For every `domain` entry compare:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* For every `domain` entry:
```

> * For every `domain` entry compare:
>   * Each entry of `members`, i.e. `environment` to ACS ECT `environment`
>   * If all entries match, add the `domain` ECT to ACS

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* For each DM-ECT in the staging area, check:
  * For each `member` field, is there an ACS-ECT with a matching `environment-map`, type `evidence` and suitable authentication?
  * If the DM-ECT matches the ACS then, add the `domain` ECT to ACS
```

Reviewer: In the composite attester case, should a DM-ECT in the staging area be allowed to match against an ACS-ECT of type domain?

>   * Each `i` within `members` array, check that there is an ACS entry with a matching `environment` and cm-type = `evidence`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * Each `i` within `members` array, check that there is an ACS entry with a matching `environment-map` and cm-type = `evidence`
```

>   * Each `i` within `members` array, check that there is an ACS entry with a matching `environment` and cm-type = `evidence`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  * For each `i` in `members`, check that there is an ACS entry with a matching `environment-map` and cm-type = `evidence`
```

Author: I will take this suggestion now!

>   * If all entries match, add the `domain` ECT to ACS

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * If all `members` match an a ACS entry, add the `domain` ECT to ACS
```

Reviewer 2: L2510 should be de-indented (it’s currently folded under the “for each” loop)

>   * When there is a partial match of `member` environments to ACS ECT `environment`, the following cases, may apply:

Reviewer 2: unindent + slight rewrite for clarity

```suggestion
* If there is a partial match between the `member` environments and the ACS ECT `environment`, three separate cases must be considered.  
```

  ACS ECT contains `N` environments while Domain ECT `members` reports `M` Environments:

>   1. `N` >= `M` and some entries of `M` match.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  1 If some entries of `M` match.
```

  This is a case of a Composite Attester, where other entries of `M`, may itself be domain identifiers for other `domains`.
  In such case, upon complete appraisal, they MUST appear in other `domain` ECTs.
  Otherwise, the Appraisal is failed.

> 

Reviewer: In general, I don't see a problem with having additional measurements in the ACS which are not matched. Some CoRIM authors will care about this, others will not.
Why is this a problem?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  1. If not all entries of `M` match.
    In a hierarchical system, some environment-maps within `M` may refer to `environment-map`s which are domain identifiers for other `domains`.
    If this is the case then Domain Membership triples will often fail to match during the first pass. After DM-ECTs have been added to the ACS these triples may match in future passes.

```

Reviewer 2: Given the current algorithm (L2509), I am not sure how this is supposed to work. If DM-ECTs are only matched against 'evidence' ECTs, there is no future pass that can modify the 'evidence' ECTs set and allow an opportunity for matching.
ISTM that we need to extend the matching process to include ACS-DM-ECTs if we want to allow convergence.

Author: > In general, I don't see a problem with having additional measurements in the ACS which are not matched. Some CoRIM authors will care about this, others will not. Why is this a problem?

We have corrected the text to align with ONLY matching `M` Members now. The new text addresses this concern...

>   2. If `N` >= `M` and all entries of `M` match.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  2. If all entries of `M` match.
```

>   2. If `N` >= `M` and all entries of `M` match.
>   If the Evidence reports extra environments, it may be upto Verifier policy to allow/dis-allow such Evidence.

Reviewer: Can this be written in a more declarative form?
For example, something like:
```suggestion
If, after processing all DM-ECTs, evidence remains which is not authorised by a DM-ECT the Verifier may choose to fail attestation.
```

  3. `N` < `M` and all `N` or some of `N` ACS ECT environments match some of the `M` members of the `domain` ECT.

>   The Appraisal is terminated with Attestation Results set as Verification Failure.

Reviewer: Would it be true to say that in this case attestation fails because the domain type ACS-ECT is missing at the end of attestation?
I think there is probably a clearer way to write this.

>   3. `N` < `M` and all `N` or some of `N` ACS ECT environments match some of the `M` members of the `domain` ECT.
>   The Appraisal is terminated with Attestation Results set as Verification Failure.
> 
> If none of the `members` match, proceed to next `domain` ECT in the list.
> 
> If none of the `domain` entries match, the Appraisal is terminated with Attestation Results set as Verification Failure.

Reviewer: I think the text here could be written in a simpler way and achieve the same result?

I expect attestation to fail because one or more expected ACS-ETCs are not present, or do not have the correct authorization. Can we say the same thing here?
.
For other failure cases, the relying party is looking for a correctly authorized ACS-ECT but it is not present. Can we rephrase this as the absence of the domain-id causing the failure?
That makes it similar to a missing endorsement etc.

```suggestion
If, after processing all DM-ECTs, evidence remains which is not authorized by a DM-ECT the Verifier may choose to fail attestation.
```

Otherwise, do not add the `addition` ECT to the ACS.

#### Processing Domain Membership {#sec-process-dm}

This section assumes that each Domain Membership Triples has been transformed into an internal representation following the steps described in {{sec-ir-dm-trans}}, resulting in the representation specified in {{sec-ir-dm}}.

> Domain Membership ECTs (`cmtype`: `domain-member`) are matched with ACS entries (of `cmtype`: `evidence`) using the following algorithm:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Domain Membership ECTs (`cmtype`: `domain-member`) in the staging area are matched with ACS entries (of `cmtype`: `evidence`) using the following algorithm:
```

* For every `domain` entry:
  * For each `i` in `members`, check that there is an ACS entry with a matching `environment` and cm-type = `evidence`
  * If all `members` match an a ACS entry, add the `domain` ECT to ACS

* If there is a partial match between the `member` environments and the ACS ECT `environment`, three separate cases must be considered.

  ACS ECT contains `N` environments while Domain ECT `members` reports `M` Environments:

  1. `N` >= `M` and some entries of `M` match.

>   This is a case of a Composite Attester, where other entries of `M`, may itself be domain identifiers for other `domains`.

Reviewer 4: M is a natural number. What does it mean to be an entry of M? I think we need to say the DM-ECT members.

There's a plurality mismatch here too: "entries"/"itself".

Author: New text refers to `i` in `members` which is much cleaner way of representation!

Otherwise, do not add the `addition` ECT to the ACS.

#### Processing Domain Membership {#sec-process-dm}

This section assumes that each Domain Membership Triple has been transformed into an internal representation following the steps described in {{sec-ir-dm-trans}}, resulting in the representation specified in {{sec-ir-dm}}.

##### First Pass {#sec-first-pass}
Domain Membership ECTs (`cmtype`: `domain-member`) in the staging area are matched with ACS entries (of `cmtype`: `evidence`) using the following algorithm:

* For every `domain` ECT entry (`cmtype`: `domain-member`):
  * For each `i` in `members`, check that there is a corresponding ACS entry with a matching `environment` and `cmtype`:`evidence`
  * If all `members` match a corresponding ACS entry, add the `domain` ECT to ACS
  * If none of the `members` match, proceed to next `domain` ECT in the list.
  * If there is a partial match, i.e. some `i's` in `members` has a matching ACS `environment` and `cmtype`:`evidence` add the `domain` ECT entry (`cmtype`: `domain-member`) to the ACS and proceed to ({{sec-second-pass}})

> ##### Second Pass {#sec-second-pass}

Reviewer 2: There is no first pass and second pass.
There are as many passes needed to converge - or to realise it won’t.

Reviewer 2: I think we need more time than is available before the deadline to put this into shape.  I propose that we:
1. Remove the content from the “Processing Domain Membership” section;
2. Raise an issue regarding its completion;
3. Add the issue link here as a placeholder.

Reviewer 2: What we need to describe is an iterative algorithm that tries to converge to a fixed point in terms of 3 fundamental pieces:

* initialisation,
* iterative step procedure,
* stop condition.

There should be no real difference between matching against evidence ECTs and domain ECTs. At each pass, we try to match as much as possible, add what matched, and start again until we can match no more.

Anyway, if others think it's worth merging this section as-is, I won't stand in the way. If so, please create an issue to track improvements to the processing algorithm description.

Author: Fully agree with @thomas-fossati suggestion, so we have addressed this in the subsequent commit simplifying the algorithm greatly and doing justice with it.

Andy and Dionna are on board with this and agree the text in principle.

Otherwise, do not add the `addition` ECT to the ACS.

#### Processing Domain Membership {#sec-process-dm}

This section assumes that each Domain Membership Triple has been transformed into an internal representation following the steps described in {{sec-ir-dm-trans}}, resulting in the representation specified in {{sec-ir-dm}}.

> Domain Membership ECTs (cmtype: domain-member) in the staging area are matched with ACS entries (of cmtype: evidence) using the following algorithm:

Author: ```suggestion
Domain Membership ECTs (cmtype: domain-member) in the staging area are matched with ACS entries (of cmtype: evidence) OR (of cmtype: domain-member) using the following algorithm:
```

> For every domain ECT entry (cmtype: domain-member) in staging area, which is not processed yet:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
For every domain ECT entry (cmtype: domain-member) in the staging area, which is not processed yet:
```

> For every domain ECT entry (cmtype: domain-member) in staging area, which is not processed yet:

Author: ```suggestion
For every Domain Membership ECT entry (cmtype: domain-member) in staging area, which is not processed yet:
```

> For every Domain Membership ECT entry (cmtype: domain-member) in staging area, which is not processed yet:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For every Domain Membership ECT entry (cmtype: domain-member) in staging area, which has not been processed:
```

For each i in members, check that there is a corresponding ACS entry with a matching `environment` and (cmtype:evidence OR cmtype: domain-member)

> 	* If all members match a corresponding ACS entry, add the domain ECT to ACS

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
	* If all members match a corresponding ACS entry, add the Domain Membership ECT to ACS
```

> 	* If none of the members match, proceed to next domain ECT in the staging area

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
	* If none of the members match, proceed to next Domain Membership ECT in the staging area
```

> 	* If there is a partial match, proceed to the next Domain ECT in the staging area

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
	* If there is a partial match, proceed to the next Domain Membership ECT in the staging area
```

> If the previous execution of the loop added any Domain ECTs to the ACS, then run the loop again

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
If the previous execution of the loop added any Domain Membership ECTs to the ACS, then run the loop again
```

> Else STOP processing Domain ECTs

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Else STOP processing Domain Membership ECTs
```

The processing terminates, when we have added all the Domain ECTs which are appropriate to the Evidence have been added to the ACS.

> If expected Domain ECTS have not been added, then this may affect the processing in a later phase.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
If expected Domain ECTs have not been added, then this may affect the processing in a later phase.
```

> The processing terminates, when we have added all the Domain Membership ECTs which are appropriate to the Evidence have been added to the ACS.

Author: ```suggestion
The processing terminates, when all the Domain Membership ECTs which are appropriate to the Evidence have been added to the ACS..
```

Otherwise, do not add the `addition` ECT to the ACS.

> #### Processing Domain Membership {#sec-process-dm}

Reviewer 2: This can be improved, but it’s good enough for now.  Thanks for addressing my comment.

Otherwise, do not add the `addition` ECT to the ACS.

#### Processing Domain Membership {#sec-process-dm}

This section assumes that each Domain Membership Triple has been transformed into an internal representation following the steps described in {{sec-ir-dm-trans}}, resulting in the representation specified in {{sec-ir-dm}}.

> Domain Membership ECTs (cmtype: domain-member) in the staging area are matched with ACS entries (of cmtype: evidence) OR (of cmtype: domain-member) using the following algorithm:

Reviewer 2: “staging area” is not defined.

Reviewer 2: Opened #457 to address this in the future.
